004 episode 2 draft (#17)
vantage6/vantage6-workshop: episodes/2-understanding-v6.md

---
title: "2-understanding-v6"
---

::: questions
-   Why to use vantage6?
-   How does vantage6 work?
-   How do federated algorithms run in vantage6?
-   What will be available in vantage6 in the future?
:::

::: objectives
-   List the high-level infrastructure components of v6 (server, client, node)
-   Understand the added value of v6

> -   Understand that there is different actors in algorithms

Reviewer: I think this should be *... different actors in the vantage6 network*

-   Understand that the v6 server does not run algorithms
-   Explain how a simple analysis runs on v6
-   Understand the future of vantage6 (policies, etc.)
:::

# Unique selling points of vantage6

vantage6 is a platform to perform  privacy preserving federated learning. Other platforms for federated learning are current available, but vantage6 provides some unique features:

> -   Open source.

Author: I see the this rendered correctly, also when the lesson is built

> -   Open source.

Reviewer: I think i pushed the enter when I added the future section

-   Container orchestration for privacy enhancing techniques.
-   Easily extensible to different types of data sources.
-   Algorithms can be developed in any language.
-   Other applications can connect to vantage6 using the API.

> # The vantage6 infrastructure

Reviewer: Ok so now I've red a little further. I would restructure this section a little bit as now it seems to repeat itself. I propose to remove the "The vantage 6 infrastructure components" level, so to have the following structure:

## Infrastructure components
### Server
### Data Station
### Client

> # The vantage6 infrastructure

Author: Yes, I think you're right. I will merge the two sections in one.

In vantage6, a **client** can pose a question to the central **server**. Each organization with sensitive data contributes one **node** to the network. The nodes collects the research question from the server and fetches the **algorithm to answer** it. When the algorithm completes, the node sends the aggregated results back to the server.

The roles of these vantage6 components are as follows:

-   A (central) **server** coordinates communication with clients and nodes. The server tracks the status of the computation requests and handles administrative functions such as authentication and authorization.

> -   **Node(s)** have access to data and execute algorithms

Reviewer: I would add *local* or *sensitive* to emphasis that this is the data stored at the local node:

```suggestion
-   **Node(s)** have access to the local data and execute algorithms
```

> -   **Clients** (i.e. users or applications) request computations from the nodes via the client

Reviewer: Maybe good to mention that there is not a single client but it could be the python-client, UI or bare API (or maybe even a custom client library):

```suggestion
-   **Clients** (i.e. users or applications) request computations from the nodes via the client. For example the user can use the vantage6 user interface or python-client and a third-party application can make use of the vantage6 API.
```

-   **Algorithms** are scripts that are run on the sensitive data. Each algorithm is packaged in a Docker image; the node pulls the image from a Docker registry and runs it on the local data. Note that the node owner can control which algorithms are allowed to run on their data.

> ![v6 basic schema.](fig/v6_basic_schema.svg)

Reviewer: Update the caption to be a bit more descriptive. I am not sure if we should repeat the individual components in the caption again. We should also explain the dotted line vs the solid lines. Or we should consider removing the dotted line and do not mention the VPN feature at all in the workshop. I prefer the option to keep it in, but only mention it briefly.
```suggestion
![High level overview of the vantage6 infrastructure. Client(s) and Node(s) communicate through the Server. Nodes are able to communicate directly with each other when the optional VPN feature is enabled.](fig/v6_basic_schema.svg)
```

> On a technical level, vantage6 may be seen as a (Docker) container orchestration tool for privacy preserving analyses. It deploys a network of containerized applications that together ensure insights can be exchanged without sharing record-level data.

Reviewer: Remove *Docker* as we are trying to be more generic in the near future.

> ## The vantage 6 infrastructure components
> 
> As we saw before, the vantage6 network consists of a central server, a number of nodes and a client. This section explains in some more detail what these network actors are responsible for, and which subcomponents they contain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Lets explain in some more detail what these network actors are responsible for, and which subcomponents they contain.
```

### Server

> The vantage6 server is the central point of contact for all communication in vantage6. However, it also relies on other infrastructure components to function properly. It consists of:
> 

Reviewer: I always like to make the distinction between *server* and *vantage6-server*. Where the *server* entails all components including the *vantage6-server*. The *vantage6-server* then refers only to the python application in our repository. 

```suggestion
The server in the network consists of multiple applications:
```

> -   **Vantage6 server**: Contains the users, organizations, collaborations, tasks and their results. It handles authentication and authorization to the system and is the central point of contact for clients and nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Vantage6 server**: Contains the users, organizations, collaborations, tasks and their results. It handles authentication and authorization to the system and acts as the communication hub for clients and nodes.
```

> -   **Docker registry**: Contains algorithms stored in images which can be used by clients to request a computation. The node will retrieve the algorithm from this registry and execute it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Docker registry**: Contains algorithms stored in images which can be used by clients to request a computation. The node will retrieve the algorithm from this registry and execute it. It is possible to use public registries for this purpose like [Docker hub](https://hub.docker.com/) or [Github Containers](https://ghcr.io). However it is also possible to host your own registry, for example a [Harbor](https://goharbor.io/) instance.
```

-   **Algorithm store**: Is intended to be used as a repository for trusted algorithms within a certain project. Algorithm stores can be coupled to specific collaborations or to all collaborations on a given server.

> 

Reviewer: Not sure if we want to mention these. I think it is good to mention them briefly, even though the users do not really interact with them. 
```suggestion
- **EduVPN instance**
- **RabbitMQ**
```

### Data Station

The data station hosts the node (vantage6-node) and a database.

-   **Vantage6 node** The node is responsible for executing the algorithms on the local data. It protects the data by allowing only specified algorithms to be executed after verifying their origin. The node is responsible for picking up the task, executing the algorithm and sending the results back to the server. The node needs access to local data. For more details see the technical documentation of the node.

-   **Database** The database may be in any format that the algorithms relevant to your use case support. The currently supported database types are listed here.

### Client

A user or application who interacts with the vantage6-server. They create tasks, retrieve their results, or manage entities at the server (i.e. creating or editing users, organizations and collaborations).

The vantage6 server is an API, which means that there are many ways to interact with it programatically. There are however a number of applications available that make is easier for users to interact with the vantage6 server:

> -   **User interface** The user interface is a web application that allows users to interact with the server. It is used to create and manage organizations, collaborations, users, tasks and algorithms. It also allows users to view and download the results of tasks. Use of the user interface recommended for ease of use.

Reviewer: Maybe good to mention here that it is hosted at the server?
```suggestion
-   **User interface** The user interface is a web application (hosted at the server) that allows users to interact with the server. It is used to create and manage organizations, collaborations, users, tasks and algorithms. It also allows users to view and download the results of tasks. Use of the user interface recommended for ease of use.
```

> -   **Python client** The vantage6 python client <python-client> is a Python package that allows users to interact with the server from a Python environment. This is helpful for data scientists who want to integrate vantage6 into their existing Python workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Python client** The vantage6 python client <python-client> is a Python package that allows users to interact with the server from a Python environment. This is especially usefull for data scientists who want to integrate vantage6 into their existing Python workflow.
```

> -   **API** It is also possible to interact with the server using the API directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **API** It is also possible to interact with the vantage6-server using the API directly.
```

## How algorithms run in vantage6

Federated algorithms can be split in a **federated** and a **central** part:

-   **Central**: The central part of the algorithm is responsible for orchestration and aggregation of the partial results. 

-   **Federated**: The partial tasks are executing computations on the local privacy sensitive data. 

![v6 central and federated tasks.](fig/algorithm_central_and_subtasks.png)

Now, let’s see how this works in vantage6. The user creates a task for the central part of the algorithm. This is registered at the server, and leads to the creation of a central algorithm container on one of the nodes. The central algorithm then creates subtasks for the federated parts of the algorithm, which again are registered at the server. All nodes for which the subtask is intended start their work by executing the federated part of the algorithm. The nodes send the results back to the server, from where they are picked up by the central algorithm. The central algorithm then computes the final result and sends it to the server, where the user can retrieve it

::: callout

> ## central server vs central part of an algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## vantage6-server vs central part of an algorithm
```
